---
title: What the stack
subtitle: What I used to build this site
date: 2023/03/27
tags:
  - react
  - ts
  - zod
---

## Introduction
In this blog post, I will discuss the various technologies I used to build my
recent project. I will cover the frameworks and libraries that made the
development process smooth and efficient.

## Remix
To begin with, I utilized [Remix.run](https://remix.run/), a React meta framework developed by the React Router team, and recently acquired by Shopify. 
Remix is a full-stack framework that focuses on server-side rendering (SSR)
while embracing web standards. I chose Remix because I wanted to work on a real
project with it, and also because Next.js is currently in a confusing state
between version 12 and beta version 13.

## Typescript
I have been learning Typescript for the past two months, and I must say I am
really enjoying it. This project was an opportunity for me to use Typescript in
a complete (small) project. I am convinced that Typescript is the future of
Javascript, and I cannot wait to use it daily at work.

## Zod
I used [Zod](https://zod.dev/) to validate my data. It is an excellent way to
have a schema that is also a type. This approach provides a single source of
truth for my data, which gives me confidence that my data is valid at runtime.
This makes it easy to use in my code without the need to check its validity.

## Tailwind
For styling, I opted for [Tailwind](https://tailwindcss.com/), a utility-first
CSS framework. I preferred not to use a component library like MUI or Chakra, as
I wanted to keep the site as simple as possible. Also, I wanted to have a better
understanding of how Tailwind works and how to customize it. However, I found it
a bit tricky to set up with postcss, etc. Next time, I would like to try twind,
which is a Tailwind-in-JS solution 

## Strapi
Lastly, I used [Strapi](https://strapi.io/) as a headless CMS. I had been
wanting to try it for a long time, and I am pleased with the results. The UI is
attractive, and the API is easy to use. I hope it will scale nicely as the site
grows.

## Deployment
I deployed the frontend, backend, and database using [Fly.io](https://fly.io/).
Initially, I planned to deploy the backend on Heroku and the frontend on Vercel.
However, I found out that Heroku no longer offers free plans. After deploying
the backend and database on Fly.io, I still had a free VM to use. So, I decided
to deploy the frontend on Fly.io as well.